WIP: Describe concepts of MultiTenancy applications (#33355)
quarkusio/quarkus: docs/src/main/asciidoc/security-openid-connect-multitenancy-concept.adoc

////
This guide is maintained in the main Quarkus repository
and pull requests should be submitted there:
https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/tree/main/docs/src/main/asciidoc
////
= OpenID Connect (OIDC) Multi-Tenancy
include::_attributes.adoc[]
:categories: security
:summary: This overview explains OpenID Connect multi-tenancy for Quarkus applications

> The goal of OIDC multi-tenancy is developing an application which can provide functionality to users from different organisations. Each enabled organisation could store its registered users and their credentials in its own `realm`, and use OIDC to supply security-related user information with the application. Each call to the application must therefore contain at least two kinds of information:

Author: > Should we replace `realm` with `tenant` as `realm` is quite a Keycloak specific term. And add a Note clarifying that if you work with Keycloak, `realm` typically represents a `tenant`, something like that ?

Good feedback! Will fix wording on tenant, and add an info blurb on the domain terms of tenants in some IDP:s

🤠

> * A `tenant identifier` which uniquely identifies the realm where the end user was authenticated / logged in. While you can technically use any means of sending the `tenant identifier` from the user's browser or other client-side application, it is convenient to insert it as a string within the context path of the service.

Reviewer: This is a very nice, compact summary - but it is only the case, where a tenant id has to be extracted (typically) from the HTTP request URL, is for bearer token authentication requests or `initial` non-authenticated requests to Quarkus `quarkus.oidc.application-type=web-app` endpoints which drive the code flow themselves (example, we'd like users authenticate to Google or Azure, or specific Keycloak realms, etc).

Once a Quarkus `quarkus.oidc.application-type=web-app` user has authenticated for example to Google, then they can access the application URL space without `google` being encoded in URLs - it will be encoded in the session cookie name and Quarkus will itself extract it and make it available to tenant resolves (as a Routing Context `tenant-id` attribute - this is a too technical detail though for this doc)

Author: Good feedback, here too. I Will rephrase a tad.

 However - the case of the CORS preflight request comes to mind. The session cookie Will not be sent by a browser to the resource server. So the preflight call Will not be interpreted correctly by the TenantResolver if using a session Cookie.

Am i missing parts of the flow here?

Reviewer: @lennartj But the preflight request should end at the CORS filter level and return, so it should work

.Two clients calling a multi-tenant application
[caption="Figure 1: "]
image::oidc-multitenancy-concept-1.svg[Multitenant Application]

The image above shows 2 users from different organisations call a calendar service to find their respective organisations' festivities. For the sake of simplicity, we assume that the application serves RESTful data to a browser-based Single-Page Application (SPA).

. Each user has logged in using their organisation's own single-sign ("SSO"), which is frequently called OIDC Authentication Provider (called `"OpenID Provider"`, `"Identity Provider"` or `"IdP"` in OIDC literature). Upon login, the SSO has produced an `IdToken` JWT with user data and delivered that to the user's web browser.
. The two user will call the calendar service with _different resource paths_ within the service URL to reach the calendar service. The application uses the `tenant identifier` part of the URI to identify the caller's organisation. Should an authenticated user from organisation 1 accidentally use a resource path allocated to organisation 2, the call will yield an unauthenticated HTTP response.

> . The `IdToken` data retreived from the own organisation's SSO is normally sent to the multi-tenant application with each call as an HTTP header, called `"authorization:"`. In this respect, an IdToken works as a session cookie which contains user information.

Reviewer: I'm not sure about `IdToken` references. SPA will get both ID and access tokens with the authorization code flow, with the traditional approach being is that it will itself use ID token to interact with the user but use the access token to access Quarkus to fetch something for the user.
SPA can surely post an ID token to Quarkus too, but unless a dedicated call like `useThisIDToken` is made to the application, as far as SPA passing ID token to Quarkus is concerned, it travels as a Bearer token - i.e Quarkus will treat it as the access token.
Note we have OIDC bearer and code flow guides - and I feel we should leave the aspects of dealing with the actual tokens to those guides (improve it as needed there) - here, in a nice new OIDC multi-tenancy concept doc you introduce with this PR, I believe we should highlight the multi-tenancy itself - which is done very well.
What do you think ?

Author: We could reference other guides if appropriate. 

I would suggest We spin this guide as a story through multi-tenancy, as sen from the developer's perspective. 

Will take a look and nudge descriptions in other guides so they harmomize

Reviewer: @lennartj What can make it simpler is for this concept doc to focus purely on explaining the multitenancy idea; a lot what you typed in that regard would make it a perfect concept doc wh8ch would accompany the already existing multitenancy how to doc.
Everything related to the actual token treatment, should be applied where necessary in follow  up PRs to the bearer and code flow guides IMHO, it will be easier to merge this PR that way 🙂

> With every call, the multi-tenant application can translate the `tenant identifier` "org1" to imply that the user is logged in to the SSO of organisation 1, and "org2" to the SSO of organisation 2. The multi-tenant application can also verify that the user information in the `IdToken` is not changed, and extract the data within it.

Reviewer: The actual token verification (signature, etc) is controlled by Quarkus, users can affect the way the verification is done but typically, it would be implicit for a typical user application :-)

== The 20-minute overview of a multi-tenant application

Quarkus multi-tenant applications need to perform several tasks with each call from a client to provide a simple and consistent development experience. Understanding the sequence of those steps helps designing multi-tenant applications correctly; the conceptual models described in the OIDC and OAuth2 specifications is huge and illustrating the steps required by development teams helps to clarify multi-tenant application development.

> In this example, our multi-tenant application is designed to serve RESTful resources to already logged-in users. This mode of operation is called `Bearer authentication` in OIDC and indicates that an HTTP header called `"authorization:"` with the value `"Bearer *encoded JWT token*"` must be present in each request from the client to the application.

Reviewer: A good number of providers (Auth0, Google, Github, etc) would only have opaque/binary access tokens. So I'd clarify it

> In this example, our multi-tenant application is designed to serve RESTful resources to already logged-in users. This mode of operation is called `Bearer authentication` in OIDC and indicates that an HTTP header called `"authorization:"` with the value `"Bearer *encoded JWT token*"` must be present in each request from the client to the application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example, our multi-tenant application is designed to serve RESTful resources to already logged-in users. This mode of operation is called `Bearer authentication` in OIDC and indicates that an HTTP `Authorization` header with the value `Bearer *access_token*` must be present in each request from the client to the application.
```

.Partial steps of a multi-tenant application
[caption="Figure 2: "]
image::oidc-multitenancy-concept-2.svg[Multitenant Application Steps]

The illustration below is somewhat simplified, but covers the main lifecycle security tasks within a multi-tenant application. Figure 2 illustrates a multi-tenant application which receives a call from a user authenticated within organisation 2 and the tasks performed by Quarkus shown in blue squares. The 3 numbered, red circles indicate process steps where you need to supply custom implementations to ensure that the multi-tenant application works well.

The 3 required steps are detailed below, along with descriptions of concepts and some considerations:

. Find `tenant identifier` from request, and lookup/resolve the corresponding OIDC configuration for the active tenant.
. Inject user information (packaged in a `JsonWebToken` object) from the active `AccessToken`. This includes implementing reusable logic to simplify access to information given by OIDC.
. Validate user authorization to retrieve or create data.

=== 1. Resolve the `tenant identifier` and `OidcTenantConfig`

> Before being able to execute the actual business logic of a multi-tenant application, Quarkus needs to enforce security requirements for authentication and authorization. To do that, Quarkus must verify that received `JsonWebTokens` are valid, and that the information within them permits the active user to read or update the current resource. In order to do so, Quarkus must read the active `tenant id` of the current request and use it to resolve the active tenant's OIDC configuration (defined by an instance of `OidcTenantConfig`). Finding the tenant id from the current request can be done in one of 2 ways:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before being able to execute the actual business logic of a multi-tenant application, Quarkus needs to enforce security requirements for authentication and authorization. To do that, Quarkus must verify that received ID and/or access tokens are valid, and that the information within them permits the active user to read or update the current resource. In order to do so, Quarkus must read the active `tenant id` of the current request and use it to resolve the active tenant's OIDC configuration (defined by an instance of `OidcTenantConfig`). Finding the tenant id from the current request can be done in one of 2 ways:
```

Reviewer: This is an attempt to reflect that 1) bearer tokens can be in JWT or opaque format 2) in the code flow it is typically ID token, immediately or as a session cookie, is verified - and the code flow access token can also be verified

. Provide static configuration for all known tenants and the corresponding OIDC configuration for each of them within the `application.properties` file, or
. Implement a `@Singleton` CDI bean which implements the `io.quarkus.oidc.TenantConfigResolver` interface. The resolver will be invoked for each inbound call to fetch the OIDC configuration for the active tenant id.

> The former approach will become quite cumbersome with increasing number of tenants and environments, so if your application is intended to work with more than few tenants it is recommendable to opt for a more scalable, dynamic approach. Also, it is imperative for enterprises maintaining many multi-tenant applications to use _the same algorithm_ for deriving the tenant identifier and OIDC configuration from inbound requests. This yields the necessary usability and maintainability to enable running a plethora of multi-tenant applications. While technically anything within a service request can be used to find the tenant id, it is practical to *embed the tenant id as a resource path segment within the URL*.

Reviewer: Good way to highlight when the dynamic approach scales better, thanks

[NOTE]
====
**_Question:_** Why is it "practical" to embed the tenant ID as a path segment? Why not as a custom HTTP Header or through other means?

> **_(Short) Answer:_** To reduce complexities regarding CORS-aware applications, it is practical to embed the tenant id within the path than most other means.

Reviewer: Good idea to have an FAQ section :-), but I'm concerned having `CORS` in the answer can lead to many more questions :-). Perhaps it can make sense to clarify that custom headers may be considers unsafe with CORS ?

Reviewer: Oops - you did clarify it below, sorry :-)

**_(Longer) Answer:_** During development of multi-tenant applications, it is common to run both frontend and backend services on a development machine - and if so, they have to run on different ports to avoid network clashes. This implies that the browser rendering data from the frontend development application will launch a https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/CORS[CORS OPTIONS preflight call] to the backend service, since the port differs from the front end service. By specification, browsers will not provide custom HTTP headers in the OPTIONS preflight call without special configuration - so if your tenant id is encoded in HTTP Headers, expect problems with required workarounds. Supplying the tenant id as part of the URI resource path largely removes all such problems in the development environment. Moreover, in test or production environments multi-tenant services are often deployed behind network proxies such as Apache or NGinx. Nonstandard HTTP headers require extra configuration in these proxy services to be relayed to the multi-tenant service - but encoding the tenant id within the request path will not such configuration. _You have been warned._
====

> The only required method to implement is `Uni<OidcTenantConfig> resolve(RoutingContext routingContext, OidcRequestContext<OidcTenantConfig> requestContext);`. If possible, cache realm IDs and their corresponding `OidcTenantConfig` at application launch to yield good performance during application runtime. A simple structure for resolving tenant configuration is shown below.

Reviewer: This is a good example but I believe we should clarify here it is a Keycloak specific example and that users can apply a similar technique when working with other providers

      return Uni.createFrom().nullItem()
    }

    // #1) Find the tenant identifier/realm, from the path.
    //
    val contextPath = routingContext.request().path()
    val realm = getRealmFrom(contextPath)

    if (realm == null) {

      log.warn("== No Realm derived from request path [$contextPath]")
      return Uni.createFrom().nullItem()
    } else {
      log.debug("== Realm [$realm] found from request path [$contextPath]")
    }

    // #2) Fallback to null result if the tenant identifier was not recognized
    //
    return when (val config = REALM_2_OIDC_CONFIG[realm]) {
      null -> Uni.createFrom().nullItem()
      else -> Uni.createFrom().item(config)
    }
  }

  companion object {

    @JvmStatic
    internal val REALM_2_OIDC_CONFIG: SortedMap<String, Supplier<OidcTenantConfig>> = TreeMap()

    @JvmStatic
    private val log = LoggerFactory.getLogger(OidcConfigurationResolver::class.java)
  }
}
----

This implementation concludes steps `1` in Figure 2 above. Quarkus is now aware of the tenant identifier/realm, and has resolved the configuration for the OIDC provider which authenticated the calling user.

> === 2. Retrieve injected IdToken and user information

Reviewer: This is an interesting summary that follows below, but I think it is off-topic for the multi-tenancy concept you introduce here, things like how to access the tokens, difference between them, etc. I'd like to propose for you to have a look at the current OIDC Bearer and Code flow tokens and reapply some of your proposed text below, does it sound reasonable ? Here it gets a bit technical while the main purpose is to explain the multi-tenancy concept

Quarkus provides means to inject the current user's information into the multi-tenant application's resources. It is often practical to access these properties in a standard way within your RESTful resource implementations, such as within a common RESTful resource superclass.

There are several options to inject OIDC-based user information from Quarkus's security framework into your resources, 3 of which are illustrated in the code snippet below:

. `Inject the AccessToken` typecast to a `JsonWebToken`, which holds information from OIDC provider with simple access methods. This is a `@RequestScoped` CDI bean, which is automatically provided by the `quarkus-oidc` extension. As discussed above, the access token holds user authorization information, so it is the best option to use when validating that the user is authorized to perform operations within the multi-tenant service.
. _(Preferred):_ `Inject a custom JsonWebToken wrapper` exemplified by a TokenBasedCallerInfo below. Depending on your corporate/business requirements

> . _(Discouraged):_ `Inject the IdToken` typecast to a `JsonWebToken`, which holds information from the IdToken generated by the OIDC provider. This is a `@RequestScoped` CDI bean, which is automatically provided by the `quarkus-oidc` extension. You need to qualify the injection point with `@IdToken` - but OAuth2 authentication information is not necessarily part of the IdToken as discussed above.

Reviewer: As I said above, I think all the text related to the treatment of tokens should be adapted to the bearer and code guides. Also I'd not qualify it as `Discouraged` - for most users not working with Oauth2 but certified OIDC providers it will be a real ID token.

    val firstName: String by lazy { accessToken.getClaim("given_name") }
    val lastName: String by lazy { accessToken.getClaim("family_name") }
    val email: String by lazy { accessToken.getClaim("email") }
    val roles: SortedSet<String> by lazy { rolesFromRealmAccess(accessToken) }
    val userId: Long
        get() {
            // Find the userId within the accessToken
        }

    // ... more getters, as required ...

    companion object {

        @JvmStatic
        fun rolesFromRealmAccess(accessToken: JsonWebToken): SortedSet<String> {
            // Parse the Access Token to find given roles
        }

        // ... more methods to parse the Access Token for custom purposes ...

        @JvmStatic
        private val log = LoggerFactory.getLogger(TokenBasedCallerInfo::class.java)
    }
}
----

This implementation concludes step `2` in Figure 2 above. We have implemented a wrapper around the AccessToken available from Quarkus' security framework, and injected user information (i.e. JsonWebToken claims) into the multi-tenant application.

=== 3. Validate user authorization to retrieve or create data.

> Multi-tenant applications of some complexity tend to require both annotated and programmatic authorization for users calling resource methods. Since we now have user information injected (assuming we chose to use the `TokenBasedCallerInfo` request scoped bean defined above), we can use its properties in any `AbstractCalendarResource` subclass - and any other class in which we inject the `TokenBasedCallerInfo`. The common/shared information about the service's resource path and used roles is extracted to a shared singleton holding constants:

Reviewer: For the concept doc like this one, I'd not base it on the custom token info example, it complicates things IMHO
